this video has been sponsored by
brilliant a few years ago I was able to
successfully make some transparent wood
and I thought it was pretty cool while I
was working on that project though I
accidentally stumbled onto something
else Wood related that I thought was
really interesting more specifically I
stumbled onto this paper published in
nature and it was called processing bulk
natural wood into a high performance
structural material from this title
alone it didn't sound too spectacular
but their results were actually really
impressive and they were apparently able
to make pieces of wood which were by
weight stronger than steel what I
thought was even more interesting though
was something that they said near the
end of the paper it was just a quick
comment but they suggested that with
their super strong wood it might be
possible to make lightweight and lowc
cost armor or in other words bulletproof
wood up until this point the IDE of
using wood to block bullets had honestly
never even occurred to me but the moment
that I saw this I felt that I had to try
making some the only tricky part was
that again the idea of wooden armor was
only a suggestion they made based on
some small scale tests and they never
actually tried to stop a bullet with it
however if their wood were actually a
strong as they claimed I felt that it
should have been
possible and I figured there was only
one way to find out but anyway to get
started the first step was to figure out
how to even make it so I looked at the
experimental section in the paper and it
actually seemed surprisingly simple all
I had to do was two basic steps where
the first one was to treat almost any
kind of wood using some commonly
available chemicals and then after that
I just had to squish it and heat it this
was supposed to leave me with a really
dense and strong piece of wood that was
roughly a fifth of the thickness of the
original piece the only problem was that
even though it seemed really simple I
didn't really know exactly how to do it
I mean for the first part I was totally
fine and I had everything that was
needed to treat some wood with some
chemicals the second part was the issue
though because I had no idea how I was
supposed to evenly crush a piece of wood
while heating it at the same time to do
this I figured that I was going to need
some sort of press thing and my first
thought was to get something like a
panini press and to stack a bunch of
weight onto it however I then converted
the 5 megap pascals that the paper said
I needed into a unit that I could
actually understand and it was
apparently 725 lb per square in this
meant that even for a small piece of
wood I'd have to stack thousands of
pounds onto it which I felt would be
slightly difficult it was pretty clear
that I was going to have to use some
sort of machine that was actually
designed to heat and Crush at high
pressures and I decided to try looking
online the first thing that I found were
those press things that are used to
squish designs onto t-shirts but
unsurprisingly they didn't get even
remotely close to enough pressure with a
bit more searching though I stumbled
onto what seemed like the perfect
solution and it was something called the
nug Masher Pro it was clearly meant to
crush a different plant material and not
wood but either way it basically had
everything that I needed it had two nice
big plates to squish things evenly it
could crush things with up to 40,000 lb
of force which was way more than I
needed and it had a built-in temperature
controller that I could easily set to
the required 100° C I really felt that
it looked perfect and I wanted to just
buy it until I notice that the plates
were made of aluminum which would get
destroyed by the chemicals I'd be using
and it also plus $3,600 us which was
almost $5,000 Canadian this pretty much
killed almost any excitement that I had
but it wasn't a complete loss because I
now knew exactly what I needed so with
this in mind I then ventured over to
alib Baba and within a few minutes I
found what actually looked like the
perfect machine it had some nice
stainless steel plates which could
easily resist the chemicals it could
crush with even more pressure and it
could do around 60,000 000 lb of force
and it had some easy to ous temperature
controllers the only problem was that it
was still really expensive and the final
quote that I got was actually more than
the nug Smasher pro at the time this was
also significantly more than I'd ever
spent on any project and the thought of
paying that much on an idea that might
not even work made me really
uncomfortable I decided to ignore all
logic and reasoning though and $5,000
and a few months later I was the proud
owner of an extremely heavy wooden
box I was actually kind of surprised by
just how heavy it was and I was slightly
worried that I wasn't going to be able
to move it from where the delivery guys
had dumped
it with the help of Reggie though we
were able to drag it partially across
the room and I figured that this was a
good place to crack it open so I went
and got a knife and I started by cutting
off all the plastic stick
strapping I then started flipping up all
the metal tabs that were holding down
the top of the crate and after that I
slowly opened
it and revealed my beautiful little
press I then carefully broke apart the
rest of the
crate and I got rid of all the plastic
and the accessories Reggie and I also
snapped our backs transferring this 400
lb hunk of metal to a dolly and at this
point I was starting to get really
excited after months of waiting the
Press was actually here in front of me
and it was finally time to try and make
some bulletproof wood to get started
with this the first thing that I needed
was some wood and according to the paper
it was possible to use many different
kinds like Cedar Oak popper and pine I
decided to go with pine though because
it seemed to give some really good
results and it was also by far the
cheapest and easiest to get all I had to
do was quickly go to Home Depot and for
around $20 I picked up one of the nicest
pieces that I could find I then did some
quick measurements and I started
chopping it up and my goal was to get
some pieces that were roughly 12 cm long
3.5 CM deep and 4.4 CM wide this was
very close to what the paper said was
the typical sample size that they used
and I figured that at least for my first
attempt I should probably do exactly
what they did but either way with all of
the pieces chopped off I then quickly
sanded them to clean them up a bit and
now my wood was ready to be cooked so I
went and got a 1 L Beaker and I started
by pouring in about 600 M of water I
then turned on the stirring and when I
had a strong Vortex going I dumped in 80
g of sodium hydroxide drain cleaner this
all quickly started dissolving and
generating a lot of heat and over the
next several minutes it it all slowly
disappeared when it looked more or less
clear I then got this sodium sulfite
that I bought on Amazon which was
apparently supposed to be used to cure
salmon eggs I wasn't exactly sure what
that meant but either way I just dumped
in 40.3 G of it and just like the drain
cleaner I waited for it to dissolve this
ended up going quicker than I thought
and only a few minutes later I had a
relatively clear solution and I was able
to get rid of the stir bar at this point
my chemical solution was ready and now
it was time to add the wood so I
carefully lowered in one of the pieces
and while holding it in place I added
more water until it got to the 1 lit
Mark after that I put a heavy watch
glass on top of it to push it back down
into the water and what I had to do next
was get it nice and hot so I turned on
the hot plate and waited for it to heat
up and over the next 20 minutes it
slowly got more and more yellow
eventually it was just on the verge of
boiling and it was around 100 C and at
this point I just had to leave it like
this I then came back to it a couple
hours later and it had become a dark
orange and things seemed to be going
well during this time I had also swapped
the watch glass for a flask filled with
cold water and I had added a small wood
spacer this allowed me to completely
submerge the piece of wood which I felt
was a lot better even though it was
probably fine how it was before but
anyway at least based on the color there
was clearly a reaction going on here and
in theory the chemicals were supposed to
be attacking the wood more specifically
they were supposed to be attacking and
removing two major components of the
wood called lignan and hemicellulose
which are the main things that keep the
wood together it was very important to
not get rid of them completely though
because then all the wood would just
fall apart and I would just be left with
a bunch of loose cellulose so instead
the goal was to only partially remove
them which would make a lot of extra
space in the wood and the research paper
had some good photos of what was
supposed to happen for example they
included a super close-up shot that's
looking down the end grain of a generic
untreated piece of wood it's kind of
hard to tell exactly what's going on but
all of the gray stuff is technically the
wood itself and all of the black areas
are just empty space which is normally
used by the tree to transport things
like water this on the other hand was
what it looked like after they treated
it and there was a pretty big difference
with a lot of the lignan and
hemicellulose gone a lot of that gray
stuff was gone as well and it now kind
of just looked like a bunch of tubes
these tubes were all mostly made of
cellulose though and the important part
was that there was a lot more space
between them and way less stuff holding
them in place this was supposed to make
the wood a lot easier to squish and this
was very important for the next step but
anyway according to the paper I just had
to leave it like this for a total of 7
hours and this was supposed to get rid
of the ideal amount of lignan and
hemicellulose so I just let it sit here
for another few hours and when I came
back to it the solution was way darker
than before this told me that a lot more
stuff had been removed and what I had to
do next now was wash the wood so I just
quickly got rid of this hot red chemical
solution and then into the same Beaker I
started dumping in a bunch of boiling
distilled water the goal here was to get
rid of as much of the sodium hydroxide
and sodium sulfite as possible and to
also wash away any side products that
might have formed a lot of these
chemicals and side products were deep
inside the wood though so I had to soak
it for a while the only forunate part
was that the paper didn't say for how
long and all it said was that I had to
immerse it in boiling water several
times I assumed that this meant more
than just quickly dunking it in and out
and based on almost nothing I decided
that about an hour was a good time so I
just left it there and over the next
hour the color of the water slowly
changed and I felt this was a good sign
because it meant that it was pulling
stuff from the wood after seeing this I
assumed that after each washing the
water would get less and less colored
but that didn't turn out to be the case
it quickly became pretty clear to me
that whatever was causing the color was
not a good indicator to tell me when I
was done washing it and instead I had to
keep checking the pH if there were even
a small amount of sodium hydroxide left
it would turn purple which meant that it
was strongly basic and it was still
doing this even after the third washing
it was only after washing it seven times
that the color was finally green which
told me that it was around neutral it
also told me that the wood should have
been nice and clean and I dumped off all
the water which was still orange but
either way after about 15 hours of
cooking and cleaning wood I was finally
done the first part of the process what
I was left with should have been a ligan
reduced piece of wood that was free of
nasty chemicals and I was really curious
to see what it was like without a lot of
the lignan and hemic cellular close I
was kind of expecting it to be really
soft and Squishy but that wasn't at all
the case even when I squeezed it as hard
as I could I was barely able to do
anything and it was definitely still
pretty hard I also tried bending it
which I wasn't able to do at all and I
started wondering if I'd even done
anything to the wood it really just felt
like a generic piece of wood that had
been sitting in hot water and it didn't
feel like there was any major difference
besides May maybe looking different with
all that being said though even if it
didn't look or feel special I had done
exactly what the paper had said and it
should have been good so now it was
finally time to test out my new and
beautiful hydraulic press and the first
step was to turn on the temperature
controllers I then waited for the plates
to slowly heat up to 100° C and when
they eventually got there I carefully
loaded in my little piece of wood I did
my best to make it as centered as
possible and when I felt that it looked
good I started lowering down the upper
plate it was a bit slow and clunky but I
was eventually able to sandwich the wood
and now it was time to start crushing it
so I just went ahead and started
pressurizing it by manually cranking the
handle that was on the side and it
worked exactly like a hydraulic car jack
the only difference was that it was way
slower and each time I cranked it it
looked like it barely moved the plate it
was slowly crushing it though even if it
didn't look like there was a huge
difference and at this point it was
probably already about 5% thinner
however it was also oozing out a bunch
of black liquid which I didn't really
want to leak all over my press so I
quickly cleaned it up with some paper
towel I then started crushing it again
and so far I was really happy with how
it was going unlike with my hands the
Press was doing a way better job at
squishing it and it did seem like it was
a lot easier than squishing a normal
piece of wood this also made sense
because as I mentioned earlier with a
lot of the lignan and hemicellulose
removed there was a lot more empty space
and a lot less holding the cellulose
together so with some added pressure
these empty spaces were all supposed to
start collapsing and I think the paper
again included some really interesting
photos of this this one is of course
what I showed before and this was
hopefully how my wood currently looked
on the microscopic scale this on the
other hand is what I was trying to do to
it and again there was a massive
difference all of the empty space was
pretty much completely gone and all of
those cellulose tubes had been
completely flattened on top of that the
flattened tubes had also become
intertwined with all of the other flat
tubes and this was supposed to greatly
increase its strength but anyway I then
just continued crushing the wood hoping
that it would eventually end up like the
second photo and at first it seemed to
be going pretty well the only issue that
I had was that when it got to around
half the thickness it seemed like
something bad was happening at the top
it looked like some of the wood was
rolling over onto itself and I was a bit
worried that it might be breaking or
something however I figured that it
probably wasn't a huge issue and that
it's probably normal to have some
defects when crushing a piece of wood
like this so I just kept on going and
the goal was to get it to around 20% of
the original thickness and I eventually
got there a few minutes later at this
point it was almost shockingly thin and
even though IID squished it myself I
still kind of found it hard to believe
that this used to be an entire block of
wood besides just being super thin
though the pressure on the wood was also
around the 725 PSI that the paper had
called for and I was apparently done
crushing it so now what I had to do next
was just leave it like this and all of
the water that was still left in the
wood was supposed to slowly get boiled
out at the same time though the Heat and
the pressure were also supposed to cause
the wood itself to slowly get stronger
this because according to the paper all
of those flattened and intertwined
cellular tubes should start to form
bonds within themselves and with their
neighboring flat tubes all of these
Bonds were technically only weak
hydrogen bonds but because all of the
cellulose was so closely packed together
it should be able to form a ridiculous
amount of them it was supposed to be
enough to greatly increase the strength
of the wood and more importantly to
permanently lock it in its crushed form
this would make it very different than
normal wood which would just decompress
once the pressure was gone and I was
very curious to see how it would turn
out with that being said though I then
just had to let it cook like this for
the next 24 hours and when I came back
to it it looked like it had become even
thinner I also noticed that the pressure
gauge was at zero pressure which I felt
was a really good sign this because it
meant that even without any added
pressure the wood was staying nice and
thin and I started getting pretty
excited it was now time to reveal my
intensified and hopefully bulletproof W
and when I felt that I was ready I
started lifting the upper plate I was
really hoping to see a perfect little
flat
rectangle but I was immediately
disappointed I mean it was definitely
flat which I was happy about except it
was also very wide which wasn't a good
sign there had clearly been some sort of
smooshing effect because the wood wasn't
really supposed to spread out at all and
this was a bit sad to see either way I
then went to take it off the press and
the moment that I touched it all of my
sadness quickly vanished this because it
felt completely different than I
expected and it really didn't even feel
like it was wood instead it was
surprisingly heavy and extremely hard
almost like some sort of ceramic at the
same time though it somehow also kind of
felt like plastic and it was genuinely
really cool at the same time though it
was definitely far from perfect and just
by looking at it I could see that the
fibers didn't get squished down properly
when I looked at it from the side I
could also see some very obvious
diagonal
cracks and I was really hoping they were
just
superficial I then compared it to the
piece of wood that it came from and it
was kind of surprising to see how
different it was I mean in theory it
probably should have been a little less
different that had roughly the same
width but still
I thought it was really impressive to
see just how much thinner it had become
and I found it hard to believe that this
entire block had been squished to this
thin little piece with that being said
though the next very important thing
that I had to do was test to see how
strong it was so it was of course at
this exact moment that it decided to
spontaneously fall apart this was
extremely sad to say the least and it
didn't inspire a lot of Hope but that
all changed when I tried stabbing it
with a
screwdriver I then just kept on stabbing
it and I was honestly really impressed
by just how little damage it was
doing better than I thought it would be
really doesn't do much of anything it's
pretty hard to really test it though I
felt that I had to try stabbing it as
hard as I
could and it was still really impressive
what wasn't impressive was my aim but
either way Not only was the screwdriver
completely unable to stab into it it
also seemed like it had a hard time even
scratching it this was obviously not a
perfect emulation of what would happen
if a bullet hit it but it was looking
really promising just as a comparison I
then did the same thing to one of the
untreated pieces of wood and the
difference was pretty obvious the
screwdriver was easily able to stab into
it and I didn't even have to use much
force at
all either way I was now feeling a lot
more hopeful about my little densified
piece of wood and the only thing that I
had to do next was see if it could
actually stop a bullet so I quickly made
this little wood thing to mount it to
and I clamped it in a vice I then
quickly added one of my pieces of
densified wood and with it securely in
place I went and got my gun which was
actually just a pellet gun this is not
only because firing a real gun inside my
building is both super dangerous and
felony it was also because it made way
more sense to start small I had to First
make sure that it could actually stop a
projectile and if it did I could then
move up to the more powerful stuff with
that being said though the pelic gun was
now loaded and after a few days of work
I was ready for the first real test so I
carefully lined it up and gently started
pulling on the trigger and I was really
hoping to see the pellet just get
deflected like the screwdriver
one two
three however that wasn't at all what
happened and it was almost comical how
bad it was the high-speed footage that I
got was also completely pointless and I
was kind of embarrassed that I had even
set it up I then looked at the footage
from the camera that was pointing at the
back of
it and it had apparently just exploded
it really didn't look like it had even
attempted to stop the pellet
and this was honestly pretty sad to see
especially after spending thousands of
dollars and waiting for months to try
this what also made it even sadder was
that this pelet gun was over 16 times
weaker than one of the weakest real guns
so it wasn't even remotely close to
being able to stop a real bullet and at
this point things weren't exactly
looking good at the same time though I
was very aware that this was only my
first attempt and that the piece that
IID made wasn't exactly the highest
quality this was made very clear to me
when it had spontaneously fallen in half
and there was obviously a lot of room
for improvement also I was still really
impressed by how well it had blocked the
screwdriver and in my mind this proved
that it had the hardness to potentially
block a projectile so I figured that all
I had to do was somehow make it stronger
and stop it from exploding and I had
some ideas that I really thought would
work the only issue was that right after
this I had to start moving to my new
office and I completely tore apart this
entire lab I then had to build an
entirely new one and it was only 6
months later that I was able to start
working on this project again either way
I then jumped right back into it and the
first very sophisticated thing that I'd
been waiting to try was to just use a
much bigger piece of wood seriously
though this was a very simple change but
I really felt that it would make a huge
difference and I'll explain why in a bit
with that being said the first thing
that I was going to have to do was treat
it and I did pretty much the exact same
thing as before because I didn't think
anything really went wrong with this
chemical step the only thing that I did
slightly different this time was that I
used a much bigger Beaker and I held it
down with some glass tubing this way it
would stay fully submerged the entire
time and and after heating it for 7
hours the solution had turned almost
black I then quickly took everything
apart carefully took out the wood and
washed it to get rid of the chemicals
and again after 15 hours of work I was
left with a wet block of wood it looked
and felt pretty much exactly the same as
the first attempt and the only
difference was that it was bigger and I
loaded it into the hydraulic press this
time though I oriented it with the end
grain facing the camera and from this
point on things were going to be pretty
different this because it was pretty
clear to me that this pressing step was
the major problem and I actually had a
bunch of things that I wanted to try the
first was to do my absolute best to
center it perfectly on the plate and IID
made some markings to show me exactly
where to put it I would also use a ruler
to confirm the final placement of it and
this was very different than last time
where I just centered it entirely by eye
with the in place though I then started
lowering the upper plate and this was
now the moment that I was hoping the
bigger piece would start to be useful
this is because with its much larger
surface area there would now be a lot
more space for the upper plate to sit on
and in theory this should help keep it
level this was something that never even
occurred to me during the first attempt
because I thought the upper plate was
fixed in place but I discovered later on
that it was apparently able to tilt I
also noticed that this was happening
when I closely rewatched the footage and
I saw a very subtle but clear tilt right
before things started going wrong it was
only an extremely small shift and it was
probably less than a couple degrees but
crushing the wood on even a slight angle
would be really bad because it would
force it to get pushed to one side and
this would almost definitely cause it to
smear out this was also especially
likely to happen if the piece was
significantly off center like my was and
if the upper plate was forced to just
balance on a small piece of wood so
basically the Tilt was the major thing
that I was hoping to avoid here and I
really felt that just using a bigger
piece and centering it perfectly was
going to have a massive effect on top of
this though I also decided to not
preheat the plates to 100° C and to try
squishing the wood much more slowly I
figured this would give the water a lot
more time to get pushed out and avoid
any weird internal pressure from
building up and potentially damaging the
wood and so far things were going pretty
well it looked like it was basically
just getting thinner and that was
exactly what I was hoping for as I kept
going though it unfortunately started to
spread out at the bottom and it didn't
seem like I could do anything to stop it
going even slower didn't seem to do much
either and when I looked over at the
side of it I saw something horrible it
had also started to roll over onto
itself just like the first time but it
didn't seem nearly as severe and I
figured that it was probably okay so I
just kept on going and eventually it
seemed like the wood had hit its limit
and instead of getting denser it was
just squishing out on the sides at this
point though the pressure on the gauge
was also around the 725 PSI Mark and
when I saw this I felt that it was the
right time to start cooking it so I
plugged in the press to some sockets
that I made by hijacking the power for
my dishwasher because I didn't have any
real 220 Outlets yet after that though I
was able to turn on the heating and now
I just had to wait and hope that it
wasn't another disaster I then came back
to it 24 hours later and I was really
curious to know how it turned out so I
carefully started lifting the upper
plate and this time I wasn't immediately
disappointed
still really hot but looks pretty good I
mean it definitely still had a bunch of
issues and it had those diagonal cracks
like before but what I thought was
really exciting was the other side of it
which was honestly kind of perfect it
didn't look like there were any cracks
at all and the top part was also really
nice it was actually very similar to the
original Pine that ID started with and
it didn't have a weird looking texture
or any Gap s between the fibers this
part just looks really
good it's like
perfect I then compared it to the
original piece and I saw that it didn't
spread out nearly as much and it was
definitely way better than the first
attempt so clearly using a much bigger
piece and doing all of the other little
things had helped a lot and I was really
happy with how it turned out to know if
it were actually better though and not
just a nicer looking piece of crap I was
going to have to shoot it so I got my
pellet gun again and I figured I'd blast
the ugly side first and I was kind of
expecting it to just explode like last
time however it was instead just
deflected and it hit me in the head and
I was genuinely really surprised there
was clearly a significant Improvement
and even on the crappy part it didn't
even look like the pellet had a chance
of making it through it only made a
small dent before getting completely
flattened and I thought that it was
really cool to see it get bounced away
as a little pancake just for good
measure though and to make sure it
wasn't a fluke or something I decided to
shoot it a few more
times and each time it was bounced away
with ease so apparently just by
squishing it better I had made it way
stronger and my pellet gun wasn't even a
challenge anymore instead of exploding
it it was now only making small dense
and after seeing this I started getting
really excited this because I now had
some real evidence that this wood could
stop a projectile and the idea of
stopping a real bullet was feeling like
it might actually be possible the only
issue was that even with this very
significant strength Improvement I was
pretty sure that a real bullet would
still destroy it this is because my
pellet gun was only shooting 22 caliber
pellets which weighed less than a gram
and they were only going around 500 feet
per second on the other hand though this
is the equivalent 22 caliber reel bullet
the 22 LR and it weighs over twice the
amount and goes almost triple the speed
in theory this means that it should be
able to deliver over 16 times more
energy than the pellet and I really
didn't think my piece of wood could take
that I mean maybe it could have done
something that was double or triple but
over 16 times was just insane for some
reason though I still had faith that
this would could do it but I was for
sure going to have to somehow strengthen
it even more in my mind there was also
only one real way to do this and I was
going to have to somehow stop it from
spreading out if I were able to do this
this should not only give me something
that was significantly denser and way
stronger it should also just be higher
quality in general and without any of
those diagonal cracks I really thought
that it would be enough to stop at least
the 22 LR and again I had some ideas
that I thought would work however long
story short nothing I did seem to make a
difference and after a couple weeks of
trying a whole bunch of different things
I was kind of losing my mind this
because I tried everything that I could
think of for both the chemical and
pressing parts and it eventually got to
the point that I was just blaming the
wood itself I was really starting to
think that maybe Pine actually just
sucked and that it was too soft to hold
its shape so as a completely last ditch
effort I tried switching to Oak which
was a hard one however this again didn't
seem to make any real difference and the
wood was still just getting squished out
when I saw this I honestly just kind of
felt like quitting but at the same time
I was starting to think that it was
really odd that the paper didn't mention
anything about this I also suddenly
realized that they only showed cartoon
versions of their press and this made me
start to think that this whole time they
might have been secretly using more than
just a simple press I mean I have no
idea if that's actually true but I felt
that they had to be using something to
physically stop it from spreading out
and after 30 minutes of having no idea
what I was doing in Fusion
360 I was able to design these two
pieces I then sent them to a machining
company and after a few weeks I was the
proud owner of this hunk of stainless
steel I was hoping that it would
magically solve all my problems and the
idea that I had was super simple all I
had to do was wedge in my treated piece
of wood and then on top of it I would
add this other hunk of stainless steel I
could then load this entire thing into
my hydraulic press and now it would be
impossible for the wood to squish out on
the sides in my opinion there was no way
that this could fail and I immediately
started preparing a new piece of wood
the only tricky part this time was that
if I wanted the wood to fit perfectly
into my template it had to be perfectly
sized in an Ideal World I could have
just pre-cut it to fit exactly into the
template but that wasn't really possible
because the wood expanded while it was
being treated from a bunch of testing I
also found that the amount that it
expanded was kind of random and it
depended on a bunch of factors like how
much moisture was already in the wood
and it wasn't going to be something I
could reliably predict so instead I was
going to have to cut it after the
treatment and I went through the whole
process of soaking and washing it then
when I felt that it was as chemical-free
as
possible I ran it through my poor Band
Saw having to cut wood while it was wet
and potentially full of chemicals wasn't
exactly ideal except I didn't have many
other options but anyway up until now
everything seemed to be going decently
well until it was fully cut and I
noticed something odd it looked like
most of the inside of the wood was
completely dry and it didn't seem like
it had gotten treated at all at first I
started thinking that maybe the band saw
had just dried the wood from friction
but that wouldn't make sense because
there was still a perfect line of
wetness at the top and the bottom either
way I decided to just hope that it would
magically be okay and I carefully loaded
it into my new template then on top of
it I added the huge metal block and now
I had to load this entire thing into my
press to do this I just carefully slid
it in and I did my best to line up all
of the edges this way it would be
perfectly centered in the middle of the
plates and when I felt that it looked
good I lowered down the top plate with
all of this in place it should have been
good to go and all I had to do was start
crushing it this time I didn't have to
worry at all about it squishing out to
the sides and I was also able to go way
faster and this was a million times
better than anything I was doing before
also just based on the amount of water
that was coming out I felt that there
was no way that the inside of the wood
wasn't treated in total I was able to
collect a few hundred Ms which to me was
way too much if it was just coming from
the outer part of the wood but who knows
either way it was eventually done and
over the next few hours I went back to
it every 20 minutes to repressurize it
this wasn't something i' done in the
earlier runs but from all my failed
attempts I had learned that it was
important this is because as the water
boiled out of the wood the wood itself
slowly shrank and the pressure on it
gradually decreased so if I wanted to
maintain the high pressure that was
needed I had to keep coming back to it
until pretty much all the water was gone
and and then I left it for 24 hours when
I eventually came back to it the next
day I was really curious to see what it
was like at least from the small part
that I could see at the front it already
seemed like it was by far the best
result that I had ever had and all I had
to do next was open it
up the only thing that I was kind of
concerned about was all of the dark goo
and I was honestly really worried that
it might have glued the two pieces of
metal together this would make it an
absolute nightmare to take apart but
that thankfully wasn't the
case inside of it was a beautiful piece
of densified wood and it really was by
far the best result I had ever
gotten look at
that that looks really good and the
edges how flat they are sharp and
flat that's really nice what extremely
important thing too was that it didn't
have any of those diagonal cracks and on
top of this it was even thinner than any
of the other attempts considering that
it also didn't push any of its volume
out to the side this meant that it was
significantly denser and overall it just
felt way stronger and more durable I was
genuinely really impressed and after a
long time of going in circles on what
seemed to be a really simple task I had
finally made some significant ific
progress and I felt that it was close to
perfect it really didn't seem like there
was much more that I could do to improve
it and I felt that now it was finally
time to do a real test it was time to
see if this could actually stop a real
bullet and I honestly felt like it could
do it I I have faith that I could test
it like this this was also perfect
timing because i' spent the last year
trying to get my gun license here in
Canada specifically for this project and
just by chance I had received it a few
days earlier so with this license in
hand I was able to legally borrow a 22
rifle from my friend and I drove very
far away to where it wouldn't be a
felony to shoot it I mean in theory I
probably could have just gone to a local
range or something but for some reason I
really wanted to do it in a forest and
it had actually taken months to find
land that I could legally shoot on
either way I then started putting
together the whole setup and I couldn't
help get flashbacks from the time I made
tho acetone and I had to set up a bunch
of stuff in a random Forest this time
though it was actually worse because it
was way colder and wet and it was on and
off raining and I had a lot more stuff
to set up however it still wasn't that
bad because on the drive over i' picked
up my friend Evan who runs the channel
code bullet and he was helping me out
the only sad part was that he was also
not dressed properly at all and that his
first experience in Canada was this wet
and cold Forest but anyway we had
eventually set up all the cameras and it
was time to put the wood in place to do
this I decided to go with a very
sophisticated method and I just Gilla
taped it to a large styrofoam block Evan
then wedged a stick behind it to prevent
it from tipping back and at this point I
was finally ready for the first real
test the only challenge now was that I
had to actually have decent aim and hit
the wood and also not destroy my cameras
which were uncomfortably close either
way though with all this in mind I then
loaded the gun with a single 22 LR
bullet and it was finally time to see if
all this work was worth it so I just
carefully aimed a gun that I had only
shot once
before and then I quickly ran to stop
the high-speed camera the moment I got
closer
though h i was immediately concerned by
what I saw I then quickly got rid of the
gun that I probably shouldn't have been
running with and I went back to take a
closer look
so looks like there's a a
hole right
there and
uh I there's a hole on the back too
I think the verdict is that it wasn't
bulletproof
no on the bright side I had actually hit
it but on the sad side it was pretty
clear that a real gun was way more
powerful than a pellet gun yeah that uh
that didn't
work just like the very first attempt it
also kind of looked like the back of it
had just exploded and that it hadn't
even stood a chance
this was definitely not the result that
I was hoping for and I was genuinely
feeling pretty sad about it okay that's
it let's go
home when I got back though I was able
to clean it up and take a better look at
it and I realized it wasn't actually as
bad as I thought I mean it still wasn't
ideal and the bullet had clearly gone
right through it but what was important
was that it hadn't just catastrophically
exploded it in instead it looked like it
had been sequentially peeled back in
layers and it didn't even seem like much
of the wood had been removed it also
seemed like if I pushed on it hard
enough I could basically put it back
together and this made me feel like it
wasn't actually that far off from
stopping it I really felt that something
just slightly stronger would have been
able to do it and as one final test I
wanted to try adding a second layer this
was actually something that the paper
tested and they found that that only one
extra layer could make it over five
times stronger and I felt that this
would be more than enough to try this
though I was of course going to have to
make at least a couple more pieces and
unfortunately I had to go back to
cooking and crushing wood however to go
faster I decided to scale up the whole
cooking part and in this large stainless
steel pot I was able to load in four
pieces the setup itself was also super
simple and to keep them all separated I
just used a bunch of glass rods and I
used the stainless steel cookie rack to
keep them spaced from the bottom I also
used another cookie rack at the top to
help hold it all together and I wedged
in some heavy steel rods to keep
everything in place I was then heating
all of this using a generic induction
stove and in general this was way better
than doing each one individually and it
saved me a couple days of work the only
weird part was that I ended up having a
lot of trouble with the crushing step
and every piece of wood that I made was
having issues when I took it out of the
press it would be nice and flat but as
it was cooling down it would slowly get
Warped and weird and this was not an
issue that I had before I had no idea
why or how the first attempt had just
magically worked but either way after a
few days of repeated failures I was
really starting to get worried if I
couldn't get the pieces perfectly flat
and get rid of all the warping
it would be impossible to make a decent
two-layered version in some way though
this problem ended up actually being a
good thing and it made me accidentally
improve the wood this because in a
desperate attempt to fix it I just threw
one of the pieces back into the Press at
100 C and I squished it down with 60,000
lbs of force I then let it slowly cool
down to room temperature and when I took
it out the piece was not only perfectly
flat it was also even thinner it was
actually about 10% thinner than it was
before which also meant that it was
about 10% denser and it was hopefully
even stronger but anyway I then ended up
making a bunch of extras just in case I
needed them and after a week of
frustration it was finally time to glue
some together to do this I just chose
one of the pieces that I liked the most
and I quickly sanded the top of it this
was very important to do because the
surface was so shiny and I was worried
that the glue would have a hard time
sticking to it when I eventually felt
that it was nice and rough though I
cleaned off the dust with a paper towel
and what I had to do next was add the
glue I had no idea which glue to use and
what would be the best to take a bullet
but I found this stuff at Home Depot and
it claimed that it was impact resistant
so I decided to just go with it and I
emptied almost the entire bottle and I
did my best to cover the whole piece
that then knowing that this piece had
its grain pattern going in the vertical
Direction I went and got my second piece
and I carefully lowered it down with the
grain going
horizontally this way the grain patterns
would not be perfectly aligned and
they'd be at 90° to each other and doing
it like this was supposed to make it
significantly stronger with that being
said though I just kept sliding it
around to spread out the glue as much as
possible and when I eventually felt that
it was nice and even I pushed it down
with the large metal block just for good
measure I also dropped a Tungsten Cube
on it and I left it to cure I then went
back to it 24 hours later and I got rid
of all the metal and cleaned it up and
this was the final result what I had now
was a nice block of densified wood and
just by looking at it it honestly didn't
seem that much stronger however the way
that it felt was actually very different
and I'm not sure how to describe it
there was just something about it that
made it feel way more solid and
significantly stronger than the single
piece it also really felt like it would
actually be able to stop the 22 and that
it wouldn't be a pathetic failure like
the other one there was of course only
one way to find out though so I went
back out to the forest and this time it
was bad in a different way this because
I had taken so long to make the wood
that all the snow was gone and it had
been replaced with a million mosquitoes
and black
flies this is insane an entire can of
bug spray didn't even seem to help and
to survive we just had to go as fast as
possible but anyway on a more positive
note I had made a much better mounting
system for the wood and I clamped it
into this metal thing I then shoved it
into a much stronger and heavier foam
block and it was time to shoot it should
be it all right that's all we
need I
I think I think it'll be good I think
it'll be good I then loaded the gun with
one bullet and I got ready to blast it
again I was really hoping that I wasn't
just going to completely miss
it and then I immediately ran to turn
off the high-speed camera unlike the
other time though I wasn't immediately
disappointed because I didn't see the
same clean hole as before this time it
looked like the bullet had splintered
the front part and for some reason I
felt that this was a good sign I don't
know if it went
through yeah I I don't I don't know if
it went
through it went right through
no
how the moment that I saw this I was
honestly a bit frustrated because I
genuinely thought this was going to work
are you serious I was also starting to
think that this project might just be
completely h hopeless because if I
couldn't even stop a 22 LR there was no
chance of making anything I could
remotely call
bulletproof right
through really oh no actually it stopped
it it stopped
it so the back splitting was just it was
just absorbing all the energy if you
look how deep the bullet went
right it looks kind of the same distance
that it pushed the wood out so it
stopped it oh my
God is that a success so apparently I
just lost hope way too early and with
two layers of the densified wood I had
technically stopped the
22LR in my opinion this was really cool
but at the same time I didn't feel that
it was quite good enough because the
back still got split apart I was
actually a bit worried that this would
happen though and this was why just in
case I had also made a three-layered
version in theory this should have been
even stronger than the two-layered one
and I felt that it would solve all my
problems however at the same time I also
felt that this was my absolute last
chance to make it work because adding
any more layers would make it way too
thick right now it was still thinner
than just one of the the untreated
pieces that I had started with and I
felt that this was the absolute limit if
this didn't work I'd have to come up
with some other solution or more likely
I'd probably just
quit okay I think it's good but anyway
at this point I was ready to test it so
I carefully aimed the
gun and this time my aim was terrible I
ended up kind of missing which was a
little bit sad but what wasn't sad
was the result it looked like the bullet
hadn't even made it past the first layer
and just to confirm that this was
real I shot it again what
happened it just it just chunked it
that's all it
did look at
that that's
it yo
not even splintered at all so apparently
three layers was significantly better
than two and when I looked at the high
speed it looked like the 22 LR didn't
even stand a chance I mean it totally
exploded the first layer of wood but the
bullet itself was also completely
destroyed and it was bounced away as a
bunch of fragments after seeing this I
was really excited because I had finally
stopped a real bullet using wood and by
definition I had made bulletproof wood
however it was also one of the weakest
bullets possible and when I looked up
the levels of bulletproof armor the
charts didn't even go as low as 22 LR it
seemed like the lowest rating was the
common 9 mm which is often used in
handguns and this was the bare minimum
of what many people considered
Bulletproof the only scary part was that
the 9 mm was significantly bigger and
compared to the 22 LR it would have
around 2 and 1/2 times more energy on
top of that though it also had a copper
jacket which would give it more
penetrating power and I really didn't
think my poor block of wood could stop
one however I felt that if I actually
wanted to consider what I had made
bulletproof it had to stop a 9mm and I
had thankfully borrowed another gun from
my friend this one just felt way more
powerful than the other one and I was
really not feeling optimistic
okay safety off this this my poor wood
is just
evaporating this time I actually saw
chunks fly off the piece of wood and I
was also kind of shocked by what I saw
wait yo it stopped it it actually
stopped
it what
the it's it's there it's just
flat dude you see the whole bullet just
flattened in
there that's cool who it didn't even get
deeper than the uh than the
22 they're like the same depth and it's
an injured piece of wood so
apparently the 9 mm didn't actually just
destroy it and adding that third layer
had clearly made it a lot stronger it
was also really cool to see the bullet
get almost instantly flattened and
completely stopped by the second layer
and I was genuinely surprised that this
happened the only concerning part was
when I looked at the back of it and it
looked like it had almost
exploded it was uh it was on the verge
of not making
it either way though it did stop it and
at this point I felt that I could
officially say that IID made some
bulletproof wood I mean it was of course
still far from perfect but it was way
better than anything I ever expected and
it was definitely better than the
regular wood that I had started with
this was made especially clear to me
when I tried shooting a huge stack of it
with the same 9
mm and even with seven layers it almost
wasn't enough off the bullet was
actually really close to going through
the entire thing and in comparison it
was kind of shockingly
bad it literally got stopped in the last
one
wow with all that being said though this
entire project was mostly just meant to
be a proof of concept and to see if
wooden armor was even possible and I
guess the answer is that it is I mean it
still definitely needs a lot of
improvement and this is not anything
that I would currently want to wear but
I think that it has a lot of potential I
also think that it could be really
interesting to try combining it with
other materials like plastic metal or
even Kevlar I genuinely think that it's
possible to make something that's less
than half the thickness but still easily
able to stop the 9 mm and maybe even
some more powerful bullets for now
though I think I'm tired of cooking
crushing and shooting wood
and instead I'm going to work on some
more tasty projects like turning
styrofoam into cinnamon candy all right
so this project ended up being a lot
more tedious than I initially thought
and ultimately it took a lot more than
just chemistry to get it done this is
actually one of the major reasons why it
took me so long to finish it and I've
been finding that my lack of
non-chemistry skills in general have
been delaying at least a few other
projects So lately I've been putting a
lot more effort into getting better at
things like math physics and programming
and thankfully there's been a really fun
easy and free way for me to do this more
specifically though I've been using
brilliant which I think is one of the
best ways to learn math data science and
computer science this because not only
are all their lessons super concise and
interesting they're also all interactive
which I think makes them a lot more fun
and a lot more like a game
on top of that what I really like is
that all their lessons are chopped up
into many small sections which lets me
go through each Topic at my own pace
this has been great for me because I
often only have 5 minutes here or there
but I've still been able to progress in
particular I've been working on the
programming with python course and I'm
only several lessons in but I've already
learned a lot I've also made a lot of
mistakes though and what has been really
nice is that each time there's been a
super super useful and helpful
explanation but anyway with all that
being said I've been really enjoying
brilliant and if you're interested in
learning something new in a fun way I
definitely recommend checking them out
right now you can also try everything
that brilliant has to offer for free for
a full 30 Days by just going to
brilliant.org Nile red or by clicking
the link in the description on top of
that the first 200 people who sign up
using my link will also get 20 % off an
annual premium
subscription and
uh yeah that's it as usual a big Thanks
goes out to all my supporters on patreon
everyone who supports me can see all my
new videos at least 24 hours before I
post them to YouTube You'll also get
access to all the older videos that I
had to take down and if you support me
with $5 or more you'll get your name at
the end like you see here
[Music]